# Joint genotype calling in human cohorts or families

This repository is forked from [rare-disease-wf](https://github.com/RSC-RP/rare-disease-wf),
and includes only the pipeline for genotype calling, to better follow Nextflow
standard practices. The pipeline is also updated for Nextflow syntax as of 2026,
which improves maintainability.

DeepVariant is used because it is faster than GATK and does not require as much
downstream filtering of variants. Note that (1) gVCFs generated by DeepVariant
are formatted differently from gVCFs generated by GATK, and are not interchangeable,
and (2) there will be substantial batch effects if trying to merge joint calls
across datasets called by different software (DeepVariant/GATK/BCFtools etc).

Your input files are FASTQs or BAMs from whole genome or whole exome sequencing
of human families or cohorts. You will list these in a CSV (see "Sample sheet"
below). The output is a joint-called BCF file suitable for downstream processing
with BCFtools or our in-house variant annotation and filtering pipeline.

## Sample sheet and params

In the `testdata` directory there are some CSVs that you can use as a template
for creating your own sample sheet.

If you have BAMs, list each BAM and its index in the appropriate fields (see
file headers). If the BAM is not indexed, just leave the index field blank.
If you have FASTQs, put the FASTQs in the "BAM" columns, using a wildcard
character if necessary for paired end data, and leave the index field blank.

If working with duos or trios, there will be one line per duo or trio. If there
are siblings in the dataset, you will need one line for each sibling, and you
should point to the same BAM or FASTQ files for the parents each time, but name
the parents slightly differently, for example putting "a", or "_1" at the end
of the name. In downstream analysis you can ignore any such duplicated individuals.
For duos or singletons, just leave the appropriate parent fields blank.

In the `params` directory there are some template files you can use for specifying
pipeline parameters. Fill in the path to your CSV sample sheet where you see the
`sample_bams` parameter. For `deepvar_model`, indicate "WGS" or "WES" depending
on whether you have whole genome or whole exome data. Finally, use `cohort_name`
to indicate a prefix for your output BCF. 

## Setup

Clone the repository to your association user folder on the HPC.

``` bash
git clone ssh://git@ea-bitbucket-prod.childrens.sea.kids:7999/rp/nf-deepvariant-scri.git

cd nf-deepvariant-scri
```

Make sure you have `mamba` installed according to the instructions in the HPC Guide.
Then, assuming you don't already have a Nextflow environment that matches the
Nextflow version listed in `env/nextflow.yaml`, you should install Nextflow like so:

``` bash
mamba env create --file env/nextflow.yml
```

Once in each terminal session before you run the pipeline do:

``` bash
mamba activate nextflow_deepvariant

export NXF_SYNTAX_PARSER=v2

export ASSOC="mylab"
```

where "mylab" is the name of your association.

## Testing the pipeline

After completing setup, run the test below from within the `nf-deepvariant-scri` directory.

``` bash
nextflow run main.nf \
   -profile sasquatch,test \
   -output-dir test_results \
   -resume
```

## Running the pipeline

Replace "params/myparams.yml" with your parameters file, and "results" within your
desired output directory.

``` bash
nextflow run main.nf \
    -profile sasquatch \
    -output-dir results \
    -params-file params/myparams.yml \
    -resume
```

After the pipeline is done, there will be a directory called `temp_deepvariant`
in your user directory, which you can delete unless you need it for debugging.

## Outputs

* In your output directory, a file ending in `.bcf` contains the joint genotype
calls.  You may preview it using `bcftools view` and piping to `less`.

* In the `gvcfs` directory within your output directory, there are indexed gVCF
files containing variant calling for each individual.

* A file called `gvcfs.json` lists metadata for each individual along with the
paths to their gVCF file and index.

* The `somalier_extract` directory contains binary files with genotypes extracted
by Somalier. These may be useful if you later run `somalier relate` with a different
set of samples.

* The pedigree used for Somalier ends with `.somalier.ped`. It may be useful for
input to variant filtering with Slivar, but will need phenotypes to be filled in,
and possibly sample names to be converted to how they are in the VCF.
